---
title: "Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit Study Guide - Coursehero"
tags:
- internetContent
- bookSummary
- philosophy/hegel
type: article
fc-calendar: Gregorian Calendar
fc-date: 
year: 2023
month: June
day: 26
creation date: 2023-06-26 19:17
modification date: Monday 26th June 2023 19:17:41
---

#internetContent  #bookSummary #philosophy/hegel 
## Article link:
https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/
_____
## Overview

### Author

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

### Year Published

1807

### Type

Nonfiction

### Genre

Philosophy

### At a Glance

_Phenomenology of Spirit_ is Hegel's first major work. He intended it to be the introduction to what he considered a scientific system of philosophy that would surpass the work of previous idealist philosophers such as Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). Hegel believed that knowledge is not discovered by individuals but is produced over long periods of struggle and development within human societies. Hegel's work was an attempt to reveal the long process of the development of collective human consciousness, or collective mind, which he called "spirit."

Hegel's text is long, dense, and complex because he believed it was necessary to take the time to show and examine every step of the process by which human thinking developed. It was also enormously influential on a variety of later thinkers. The greatest impact of the text is its promotion of Hegel's conception of the dialectical method, which would be adopted and adapted by thinkers such as German philosopher Karl Marx (1818–83), coauthor of _The Communist Manifesto_ (1848), and French author and philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–80), who is well known for his existentialist literary works. Hegel's dialectic can be seen as a fundamental process occurring in human thought that has been driving the evolution of humanity, individually and collectively, throughout history. In the dialectical process, new ideas and other phenomena, such as customs, ethics, and theories, result from the tensions, contradictions, and discovery of flaws within and between existing ideas and cultures. Old ideas are sublated, or negated in a process that both destroys and preserves them, and new ideas, which are adapted and synthesized with the old, arise. A sublated idea or culture ends, but its components and essence are remixed or echoed in the resulting synthesis. Because Marx, Sartre, and many others were reacting to Hegel's ideas, _Phenomenology of Spirit_ is critical to understanding these later bodies of work.

### About the Title

_Phenomenology of Spirit_ is a translation of the original German title, _Phänomenologie des Geistes_. _Phenomenology_ is the study of the appearance or revelation of things as they are apprehended by the five senses and human consciousness rather than the attempt to ascertain an awareness of the objective inner nature and reality of the things that exist. _Spirit_ is Hegel's term for the collective human consciousness, or collective mind and ethic. Hegel intended for his text to show the gradual revelation of the progress of human thinking—from consciousness to spirit, to knowledge of absolute truth—across successive periods of development in history.
___
# Main Ideas

## Thinking Happens Dialectically

_Phenomenology of Spirit_ is the first and most profound expression of Hegel's dialectical method. Dialectic thinking was developed by ancient Greek philosophers who explored ideas through real or imagined dialogues. The Hegelian dialectic holds that thought is produced in definite stages, as ideas confront their (internal or external) opposites. The result of this confrontation is a new idea, which then undergoes the same process of struggle and refinement throughout history. The Hegelian dialectic is often summarized as a process that begins with a thesis, confronts an antithesis (the opposite), and leads to a struggle that produces a resulting idea, or synthesis. There are several implications of dialectical thinking. One is that ideas and concepts always contain contradictions within themselves and presuppose an opposite that will lead to a confrontation. Thus, ideas always have the potential of the dialectical struggle as part of their nature. Another major implication is that thought does not proceed in a smooth fashion. Instead, thought arises from a long and often messy series of struggles, confrontations, and contradictions. Hegel believed that the entire process of understanding ideas and their history was precisely this investigation of their dialectic.

For Hegel, the dialectic exists because ideas are not produced in a vacuum. Rather, all thinking happens within society and social circumstances. Ideas are naturally in dialogue with others, just as humans are in a series of relationships and struggles with other humans in society. Hegel believes that thought and society are one and the same. Thinking proceeds dialectically because it happens in society, and likewise, human society evolves dialectically for the same reason.

Hegel's text is modeled on this dialectical mode of thinking. Although he does not use the terms, the triplet pattern of "thesis-antithesis-synthesis," introduced by German philosopher Johann Fichte, recurs throughout the work. It provides much of the structure of his examinations of consciousness, self-consciousness, reason, spirit, and religion, each of which is divided into three broad sections that represent each of the stages in the dialectic. These sections are broken down further in dialectical terms. A habit of Hegel's, informed by his dialectical method, is his tendency to propose an idea then give its inversion, or opposite. This is the dialectical method in action. A good example is the master-servant relationship. People struggle to be recognized by others, which may lead to a life or death struggle that ends in annihilation. To prevent this, some people make themselves lords to establish their selfhood by denying it to others. However, the result is that it is actually the servants who experience the self-consciousness that leads to discipline, self-mastery, and morality. The argument proceeds, broadly, from thesis, to antithesis, to synthesis, with a characteristic subversion of expectations. Hegel believes that this is exactly how thought works in the world.

## Spirit Is Collective Human Thought

What Hegel means when he uses the term _Spirit_ is relatively vague in the text. However, this might be intentional. What Hegel seems to be indicating when he discusses "Spirit" is a collective human mind, or human consciousness. It is the product of individual human thought and actions, but it exists within and above human societies. It reflects the traditions, morals, ethics, laws, and culture of a community, as well as individual humans within that community, so spirit exists within societies. But it also exists above the minds of individuals and their societies, as an idealized expression of those values. This is why Hegel uses the term _Spirit_ (_Geist_ in German), precisely to summarize these ephemeral, difficult-to-decipher qualities.

Hegel strongly implies that spirit is an ascendant stage of human thought. It has taken centuries for humanity to reach the level of "Spirit." This is the story he tells in _Phenomenology of Spirit_. Hegel does not believe that spirit existed in earlier ages. It is only something that has been reached relatively recently, especially in the aftermath of the French Revolution at the end of the 18th century. Spirit is thus heavily associated with the nation, or the spirit of a people, as found in the example of the revolutionary French state, and especially in the national army of Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte of France. Hegel believed that this coming into being of spirit was effectively the last true revolution in human thinking. His text is intended to reveal this evolution and thus to spur on the further birth and growth of spirit. He believes this revolution is crucial for humanity's ability to finally grasp true and absolute knowledge.

## History Is a Story of Progress

A strong implication of Hegel's account of the evolution of spirit is that history proceeds in a clear direction. Hegel's phenomenology reveals the stages and conflicts by which human thought proceeded from mere consciousness to the level of spirit. Every stage was necessary for the one that followed, until humanity is able to reach the ultimate goal of "absolute knowing," or knowledge of the true and universal whole of reality. Hegel's argument is both a history of progress and an insistence that history is progress. That is, humanity's existence will produce a greater and more refined ability to think and understand the world.

Hegel does not believe this progress was without incident or struggle. Because of his commitment to examining the world dialectically, Hegel insists that the history of thought is precisely one of constant struggle. His account of the history of thought is full of examples in which the outcome of a dialectical process produced an unhappy outcome. Indeed, he even calls one such outcome the _Unhappy Consciousness_, which exists in a state of despair. Hegel's argument, however, is that even these unhappy outcomes were necessary stages in a story that was ultimately headed toward a positive outcome.

Hegel was not alone in thinking that history was a tale of human progress. During the period in which he lived, such a view was a very ordinary way of looking at history. The sophistication of Hegel's story of progress, however, lies in exactly how messy, complicated, and sometimes counterintuitive it is. He reminds his readers several times that many of the phenomena he outlines were invisible to people and to societies living through that stage of evolution. It is only in looking back at the road humanity has traveled that humanity can see that it was a road at all.
___
# Context

## Idealism

_Phenomenology of Spirit_ is a work in the "idealist" tradition of philosophy. There are two major strands of idealist thought. The first is the belief that reality is a creation of the human mind. Even when people think they experience something of the outside world through their senses, idealists argue that they are only interacting with the model their mind is making out of that sensory data. Idealists in this first camp range from believing that reality is a construct of the mind, to believing that the mind is all that exists. The second strand holds that, although _something_ exists outside the mind, people cannot have direct knowledge of it. Thus, any knowledge of this external reality is so greatly impacted by how the mind perceives and constructs it that this knowledge is limited, in a sense, to being knowledge of the self. People do not just see the outside world; they decide what it is that they are seeing, using an active process. The first strand of idealism is sometimes called "ontological idealism" because it deals with the nature of existence. It is also referred to as "metaphysical idealism." The second is usually called "epistemological idealism" because it deals with the nature of knowledge. The second is also, less frequently, called "formal idealism."

#### The Influence of Immanuel Kant

Specifically, [Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/author/) seeks to build on, and surpass, the work of the German idealist philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). Kant was the first philosopher to really identify as an idealist, and his specific theories came to be known as "transcendental idealism." Kant argued that knowledge derives entirely from human understanding and that morality and ethics proceed from human reason. Thus, all understanding of the world is a result of human thought, which is itself rooted in the fact that humans are free and thinking individuals. Kant ultimately thought that people could not know things "in themselves." That is, humans could not know the inner nature of things, only how they appear to human understanding and perception. But he did not reject existence of the "thing-in-itself," which is referred to as the noumenon (plural, noumena).

Kant greatly influenced a group of German philosophers in particular and is considered the founder of German Idealism. Kant's followers, like Johann Fichte (1762–1814) and Hegel, were inspired by Kant but also intended to surpass him. Their ideas were more radical than those of Kant. Fichte attempted to create a systematic doctrine, or principle, of knowledge based on the idea that the ego, the self or subjective observer, was a sovereign entity in the world. The ego, in Fichte's view, is not a fixed entity but a self-producing process. Because the ego produces itself, it owes its existence to nothing outside itself and is thus wholly autonomous. Thus its perception is also independent of the natural world; that is, it is not empirically derived through experience or observation. This logic allowed Fichte to bridge Kant's vexed gap between the thing-in-itself (noumenon) and the thing as perceived in the mind (phenomenon).

Hegel also took much from Kant's work. His dialectical approach to the history of thought was substantially derived from Kant, as were the basic facts of his idealistic stances. But Hegel sought to develop an understanding of how the mind could come to encompass absolute knowledge, so he rejected some of Kant's methods and conclusions. Hegel believed that the history of thought was the history of the evolution of human society as it moved towards the form of "spirit" (collective consciousness). He aimed to show that knowledge was produced by successive steps of struggle and refinement through a dialectical process. In his assertion that knowledge advances toward an absolute idea, Hegel broke with Kant's notion that human perception can never reach the thing-in-itself. Unlike Kant's transcendental idealism, Hegel's absolute idealism posited that the thing-in-itself was a meaningless concept: a thing can only exist as an object of conscious perception. Nevertheless, Hegel's work is all but unintelligible without knowing that he bases many of his ideas, assumptions, thought processes, and terms on those of Kant.

## The Enlightenment

Like Kant, Hegel's work is a product of, and a reaction to, an intellectual movement called the Enlightenment. The Enlightenment (in German, the _Aufklärung_) was a movement in the arts and sciences that began in the late 17th century, principally in France, and spread to thinkers in Western Europe in the ensuing years. The central notion of the Enlightenment was to apply human reason, rational thought based on observation and experimentation, to the arts, sciences, and government to elevate humanity and human endeavors. In particular, Enlightenment thinkers were concerned with discovering, creating, and theorizing truth and beauty in the world, and establishing government based on human liberty.

In the German-speaking world, thinkers like Kant viewed the Enlightenment as the movement to elevate humanity from its infancy into a state of intellectual and cultural maturity. Specifically, Kant believed that the Enlightenment was the process of humanity learning to think for itself, while in the past it had refused itself this capacity. Kant thus viewed Enlightenment as a process, not as a fixed idea. Enlightenment was a method of doing things. Kant's view of Enlightenment also rejected much of the past as backward, immature, and something to move away from. Enlightenment thinkers and artists promoted human reason and efforts over those of older institutions and ways of thinking. The doctrines of Western European Christianity were challenged by thinkers like the Deists, who believed in a divine power or an absolute being, but not in the specific form of the Christian God. Significant contributions were to be found in the work of natural scientists (physicists, biologists, and chemists), who radically reshaped the way humans thought of their universe, how it worked, and what their place was within it.

For Hegel, the Enlightenment was a necessary step in the evolution of human thought. As a follower of Kant, one of the great thinkers of the German Enlightenment, he owed much of his framework to the Enlightenment. But he viewed enlightenment, and reason, as something humanity would move beyond as it progressed. In _Phenomenology of Spirit_ Hegel criticizes the Enlightenment conception of reason for relying too heavily on the hard evidence required in empiricism, the theory that knowledge should be derived through direct observation or experience. Hegel's sense of what reason is leans more toward something like divine wisdom. He condemns many earlier scientists whose empirical practices resulted in nothing more useful than lists of objects in the world. Hegel's work is thus a self-conscious reaction to the Enlightenment and an attempt to look toward a new, and superior, mode of thought, that of "Spirit."

## The French Revolution and Napoleon

The French Revolution, which began in 1787 and reached a high point in 1789, when the French citizenry stormed the Bastille fortress, had a clear and decisive impact on Hegel's thinking. Taxation disputes between the monarchy and aristocracy, the rise of the lower classes, who sought to abolish feudalism, as well as the rise of the middle class, or bourgeoisie, which included merchants, professionals, and manufacturers, and the general disbelief in the divinity of the monarchy were all factors in the revolution. This period in France marked a radical shift in governmental power, as people become more educated and enlightenment thinking trickled down to the common people. The civil unrest was bloody and violent. The French Revolution also had a direct influence on the course of Hegel's life in the form of Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821) of France. Bonaparte, who swept away the revolutionary republic in a 1799 coup and led his armies to conquer much of Europe, invaded what is now Germany and displaced many thinkers from their homes, including Hegel, in 1806. The French Revolution and Napoleon thus had an unmistakable impact on the course of Hegel's life. The emperor also became for Hegel an embodiment of, at first, the "World-Spirit" he saw as shaping history. Subsequently, Hegel viewed Napoleon's defeat as the inevitable consequence of the dialectic process in which old ideas, cultural practices, and theories are discovered to be flawed or contradictory and are sublated, or eliminated, and replaced by new, synthesized ones: the traits responsible for Napoleon's success were simultaneously the inherent flaws that caused his undoing.

The French Revolution overthrew the French monarchy and instituted a republic, or a government by the people. The principles of the revolution, and the republic that followed, were influenced by the political and moral theories of Enlightenment philosophers. Swiss-born French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–78), in particular, was one of the chief inspirations for the revolutionary government. This government aimed to represent the popular will by securing individual freedom, based on the idea that all humans had intrinsic rights. Hegel, as an observer, initially approved of this apparently positive political development. His attitude changed, however, as the revolution gave way to a period of mass incarcerations and executions, referred to as the Reign of Terror (1793–94). Even though the rationalization for the Reign of Terror was that it was necessary to protect the fledgling republic from the threat posed by both internal dissent and external wars, Hegel detected a flaw in Enlightenment thinking and reason in the excesses of violence. Ultimately, this experience led him to seek to explain reason and Enlightenment as steps on a longer road in the progress of human thought.

Hegel believed that the French Revolution had ushered in a new era of thought and social existence. It had not reached its fulfillment in the form of "Spirit," or communal or national collective consciousness, however, at the time when the revolutionary government was itself swept away by Napoleon Bonaparte. Hegel, who was living in Jena in 1806, witnessed Napoleon's entrance into the city after his great victory over Prussian forces at the Battle of Jena that same year. He had almost completed _Phenomenology of Spirit_ at the time and remarked that Napoleon himself seemed to encapsulate and personify the "World-Spirit." Nonetheless, despite his admiration for Napoleon, he suggests in _Phenomenology of the Spirit_ that the project of the revolution would be completed in Germany, not France. Hegel's work is keen to stress that the evolution of thought occurs at specific historical moments. In this, he was at least partly inspired by his own experience of living through an era of revolution, turmoil, and the promise of a whole new mode of thinking and experiencing the world.
___
# Brief Summary

## Summary

### Preface

[Hegel](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/author/)'s preface, written after the work was completed, introduces and summarizes his argument. He says that his work is aimed at producing a systematic science of philosophy. To do this, he intends to unveil the history of how collective human thought, which he calls "Spirit," has evolved over successive stages of development in history. He implies that as he is writing, the ascent of "Spirit" is occurring, and he intends his work to be part of this ascent.

### Introduction

Hegel introduces his methods and his stance on philosophy. He establishes his idealist principles but argues that knowledge of the world, and even of the absolute (ultimate, all-encompassing truth) is possible. He claims that he can demonstrate that it is possible because it is demonstrated by the history of the ascent of human thought. This ascent, however, is only viewable in retrospect. His work intends to provide the reader with just such a view.

### Consciousness

According to Hegel, consciousness is the earliest stage of human thought. Sense-certainty is the part of consciousness that deals with the earliest and simplest level of thought—simple, passive intake of sensory data about the world. Hegel shows how sense-certainty becomes perception, the active process of thinking about the world. Neither sense-certainty nor perception can grasp truth. He then proceeds to discuss the synthesis of the sense-certainty and perception, called the _understanding_, a term he borrows from Kant. The understanding applies perceptions about the world and makes laws about how the world must act. However, Hegel argues that the understanding really is only pointing out the limits of human thinking.

### Self-Consciousness

Self-consciousness is a product of consciousness. The process is a social one, as Hegel describes. Self-consciousness occurs when consciousness becomes aware of other consciousnesses (other human minds) in the world. Self-consciousness is produced by the reciprocal acknowledgment of other self-consciousnesses in society. Hegel contends that humans end up in a struggle to be recognized by others. This struggle leads to some humans making themselves masters, or lords, over others, and defining their selfhood by diminishing that of others. Hegel says that the lord in this example, however, does not develop self-consciousness by becoming a lord over others. Instead, the lord ends up promoting self-consciousness in the servants, who, by always having the image or the ideal of the lord to compare themselves to, develop self-discipline, which Hegel considers the root of true self-consciousness.

### Reason

Self-consciousness becomes reason when it realizes that it (the self-conscious human mind) is all of reality. What Hegel means is that reason is achieved when humans realize that human perception is all that humans can experience. Reason is applied to the world outside the mind, but all that exists, for humans, is the reasoning mind. Hegel argues that reason is the mode of thinking that realizes the thinking mind encompasses all that is real and applies thought to this reality to reshape it. Hegel lays out a rough sketch of the history of reason. He dismisses psychology and other attempts to discern spirit in the characteristics of humans. He shows that work is the source of ethics and morality because it is the practical application of thoughts about the world.

### Spirit

Spirit is reason made fully self-conscious and fully confident. Spirit exists in an ethical order within and above human society. It is the ethics, traditions, and values of a society, and it is produced by humans living within society, not isolated human minds. Hegel considers how the primitive ethical order in human societies breaks apart because of various kinds of individualism. He examines how Enlightenment society attempts to put together a new ethical order based on an inaccessible god. Ultimately, the contradictions of this ethical spirit are resolved as humans take in the absolute ideal of Divine Law (God or a supreme lawgiver) into their own minds, as conscience. Hegel remarks that conscience is effectively amoral in itself. Morality comes from spirit, which changes depending on the society that produces it.

### Religion

Hegel draws a historical account of the evolution of religion, from simple religion based on natural phenomena, to revealed religions like Christianity. His account of religion is a mirror and counterpart to his account of the evolution of human thought and spirit.

### Absolute Knowing

Hegel reveals his belief that the ultimate goal of the evolution of human thought is to grasp the "absolute," or the true, ultimate, all-encompassing unity of existence. The means by which the absolute can be grasped are provided by the systematic philosophical science Hegel claims he is constructing. He reiterates that knowledge is formed by a lengthy dialectical process, the exact process he has spent his text describing.
___
#  Preface | Summary

_Phenomenology of Spirit_ contains a preface, introduction, and six chapters with many numbered sections. This guide further breaks down some sections as well as examines the sections contained in each chapter.

## Key Takeaways

- The preface serves to outline the principles of Hegel's work. It was written after the text was completed and sums up his argument.
- Hegel's intent is to develop a scientific study of human thought. He believes that philosophical truth can only be worked out in such a "scientific system." He argues against the work of philosophers like Immanuel Kant, a German philosopher who believed that free will was the basis of reason and morality. Hegel believes Kant contributed little to the scientific examination of truth and only mystified things. He argues that human consciousness must be examined as a lived experience or a thing that really exists in the world. This is what he means by _scientific_.
- Hegel states that the world is about to experience a new revolution in the history of thought. This is the birth of a new, scientific mindset, which he claims has long been in development. Exploring this long development is what Hegel means when he refers to the "phenomenology of spirit." Hegel calls it phenomenology because he believes that "spirit," the collective human consciousness, is gradually revealed by the progress of thought. That is, spirit moves progressively towards absolute knowing through a process of building and refining. He argues that human knowledge is built through experience, which is tested and contested against different circumstances and ideas.
- Hegel compares philosophy to mathematics and history. He points out that the truths of history are contingent, that is, they depend on evidence and circumstances. Mathematics is built on a foundation of logic and proofs. Hegel argues that philosophy is not like mathematics. He considers mathematics too abstract and unchanging to be a model of philosophical development. Instead, Hegel stresses that philosophy is dynamic.
- Hegel finishes by talking about philosophical language. He says that philosophy is a distinct mode of thought with its own skills. To be taken seriously, and to describe philosophical ideas clearly, philosophers must use logical language. Hegel expresses a wish that his work will be valuable to the public and assist in raising public consciousness. He wishes for his work to be part of the birth of the new era of science.
___
#  Preface | Summary

_Phenomenology of Spirit_ contains a preface, introduction, and six chapters with many numbered sections. This guide further breaks down some sections as well as examines the sections contained in each chapter.

## Key Takeaways

- The preface serves to outline the principles of Hegel's work. It was written after the text was completed and sums up his argument.
- Hegel's intent is to develop a scientific study of human thought. He believes that philosophical truth can only be worked out in such a "scientific system." He argues against the work of philosophers like Immanuel Kant, a German philosopher who believed that free will was the basis of reason and morality. Hegel believes Kant contributed little to the scientific examination of truth and only mystified things. He argues that human consciousness must be examined as a lived experience or a thing that really exists in the world. This is what he means by _scientific_.
- Hegel states that the world is about to experience a new revolution in the history of thought. This is the birth of a new, scientific mindset, which he claims has long been in development. Exploring this long development is what Hegel means when he refers to the "phenomenology of spirit." Hegel calls it phenomenology because he believes that "spirit," the collective human consciousness, is gradually revealed by the progress of thought. That is, spirit moves progressively towards absolute knowing through a process of building and refining. He argues that human knowledge is built through experience, which is tested and contested against different circumstances and ideas.
- Hegel compares philosophy to mathematics and history. He points out that the truths of history are contingent, that is, they depend on evidence and circumstances. Mathematics is built on a foundation of logic and proofs. Hegel argues that philosophy is not like mathematics. He considers mathematics too abstract and unchanging to be a model of philosophical development. Instead, Hegel stresses that philosophy is dynamic.
- Hegel finishes by talking about philosophical language. He says that philosophy is a distinct mode of thought with its own skills. To be taken seriously, and to describe philosophical ideas clearly, philosophers must use logical language. Hegel expresses a wish that his work will be valuable to the public and assist in raising public consciousness. He wishes for his work to be part of the birth of the new era of science.
___
# Consciousness, Part 1 : Sense-Certainty | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel believes that consciousness develops in stages, each building upon the last, so he starts at the beginning, with what he calls "absolutely immediate knowledge." This phrase refers to the knowledge of "what is just there" with no more thought or conceptualization applied. Hegel says that this sort of knowledge is potentially infinite and potentially variable. It is also the poorest form of knowledge because the basic facts of what exists in the world do not tell people anything beyond the fact that they exist.
- Hegel calls this kind of consciousness _sense-certainty_ because it is what people's senses perceive and gives them facts about what exists. But Hegel argues that sense-certainty is more complex than it appears because the object people perceive is different in itself (in its own qualities) than what people perceive it to be. Sense-certainty always perceives in terms of here and now. But here and now (positions in place and time) are always changing. Thus, what appear to be facts provided by the senses are universal rather than definite because the facts depend on a particular state of "here and now" that vanishes as soon as it is pointed out. Moreover, the facts are only what they appear to be to the individual observer. They are different from another's experience and cannot even tell someone what the other person's experience of them truly is.
- For all these reasons, Hegel says that sense-certainty cannot grasp anything definite. It tricks itself into thinking that it can. Sense-certainty can only point out the universal or general (like the general "here"), but cannot deal with particulars.
___
# Consciousness, Part 2 : Perception | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Where sense-certainty tries to grasp what is immediate but can only point to the universal, perception takes "the universal" as its object. Perception is the active counterpart to sense-certainty or sensation. In perception, the subject (the human observer) points out details about the object (what is observed) rather than just passively receiving sensory information about it.
- A thing being perceived, or the object of perception, is composed of the properties the thing possesses (its internal qualities like shape and color), the location in space and time in which the thing appears (where it is at what point in time), and the properties of the thing, which people treat as universals (qualities like weight or volume or value). However, Hegel argues that the characteristics that make a thing a specific object (this rock, with this shape, this weight, this color) do not really make it a unique thing. The rock exists in relationship to all other rocks, and to other objects besides. Hegel says that, in asserting the existence of one specific object with specific characteristics, people deny the existence of all the other characteristics it could possess (this rock here has this color and not all the other colors it could have). To identify specific characteristics and specific objects, perception is engaged in what Hegel calls _negation_. The logic of negation ultimately strips away all the specific characteristics of an object (because it reveals that all objects are related, connected, and comparable to all other objects). Negation reveals that perception asserts nothing more than what Hegel dismisses as the mere existence of an individual object, and not that it has any definite characteristic.
- Hegel points out a conflict in the processes of consciousness when dealing with perception. Perception sees the thing perceived not only as a definite and unique thing, but also as a collection of universals. It is both a definite object and a collection of potentially infinite qualities. Universals are concepts, ideas, and relationships that condition human thinking. They are the general categories and concepts that order how people perceive the world. For instance, someone might say that a rock on the ground is a definite thing. But it is also part of the universal category of rocks, which shapes how people think about the rock and identify it as a rock. Universals are produced by human collective thought, through culture, tradition, and social convention. The contradiction (between the definite and universal qualities of the object) causes consciousness to doubt perception, reverting to pure sense-certainty. Hegel describes how consciousness eventually tires of trying to resolve the contradiction in objects and simply accepts that objects being perceived are both unified and diverse.
- Hegel points out that things must have an internal distinctiveness and also an external diversity. That is, there is something about the object, internal to itself, that distinguishes it from other objects. It must also have external qualities that make it distinctive from other objects. But Hegel says that this internal and external distinctiveness cannot be distinguished from one another.
- Ultimately, Hegel claims that perception cannot really arrive at truth. All its conclusions are tentative or must be qualified. All perception can really show is its own untruth.
___
# Consciousness, Part 3 : Force and the Understanding | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel proceeds to show how sense-certainty and perception resolve into the most complete form of consciousness, which he calls the _understanding_. He has previously shown that sense-certainty and perception conceive of objects at once unified and diverse. Hegel argues that a process, which he calls _force_, is how the unity of an object becomes its diversity, and vice versa. This process is continuous. Hegel states that force exists in two ways. The first is as a real, active force in the world of phenomena. That is, it exists in reality. But he says that force is also a pure notion, a pure idea, that acts beneath the surface of what can be seen and shown (phenomena). Hegel thinks this second form of force is a more interesting way of thinking about it.
- Hegel concentrates on the subsurface movements of force because he thinks it is crucial to the development of the understanding, which is the highest form of consciousness. The understanding is the result of consciousness being applied to the force that lies beyond the surface level of events and phenomena. That is, the understanding consists of knowing what lies beyond the surface detail. It grasps the background, not just the foreground, of the world.
- Hegel stresses that the functions of force are dialectical. A dialectic is a process that acts like a dialogue, with one side acting, the other acting in response, and so on. Because force is dialectical, the understanding is capable of seeing the principles that lie behind events. The understanding grasps how forces are acting and reacting and can discern the patterns in these actions and reactions. The principle or pattern that underlies the movement of forces is a _law_. Hegel suggests that behind all the chaos of phenomena are revealed, in the understanding, the calmness of laws, which do not change even though they produce chaotic outcomes.
- Hegel then argues that if there is a realm of laws, there must also be a realm in which all the difficult and complex phenomena of the world exist. That is, there is one world that humans can make sense of, and in which phenomena are the result of laws. There is also another world humans can make sense of, and in which phenomena are phenomena—they exist because they exist. These worlds are opposites. Hegel says that these two worlds are the result of the process of the understanding. At this point, the understanding is not really describing the world. It is coming to terms with itself, its limits, and its capabilities. Hegel points out that he and his readers know this as observers, but people in the earlier stages of the development of consciousness were not aware of it.
___
# Self-Consciousness, Part 1 : The Truth of Self-Certainty | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- In the chapter on consciousness Hegel concluded that consciousness was ultimately only able to see itself. To proceed toward the ability to grasp absolute knowledge, spirit must develop further. For consciousness to progress, it must pass through _self-consciousness_. Self-consciousness is a thinking mind that is aware of itself, not just of the world. It is a mind that is aware that it is a mind. It builds on the earlier form of consciousness Hegel described, which he calls _other-consciousness_.
- The self-conscious mind realizes that it is a thinking entity in a world that is external to it. But the world and the mind are linked by the mind's desire to assert itself in the world and become united with it. At the first stage of self-consciousness, which Hegel calls _self-certainty_, this need to assert selfhood is a pure desire. The only way this desire can be achieved is by recognizing the same self-consciousness in another. That is, people can only truly end the "otherness" of the world by recognizing that other people, other minds, are trying to do the same thing.
- Through this recognition of other self-consciousness, Hegel says that humanity proceeds to the level of spirit, the collective human consciousness. The "I" of primitive consciousness becomes the "we" of self-consciousness. Hegel reveals that he believes that true understanding of the world lies not in an isolated mind's efforts, but in the collective efforts of humans to understand the world and relate to one another. The evolution of spirit is thus a collective human endeavor, not an individual pursuit. We, as humans, develop together.
___
# Self-Consciousness, Part 2 : Independence and Dependence of Self-Consciousness | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- The collective development Hegel discussed in the previous section does not simply happen, however. Like all development, it happens through a gradual process.
- Hegel argues that self-consciousness only exists if it is recognized by another. That is, a person is only self-conscious if they recognize another self-conscious person. Recognition works both ways, that is, it is reciprocal. Self-consciousness is only reached through recognizing and being recognized. Hegel notes that an individual thus demands to be treated the same way it treats another individual because each must recognize the other as self-conscious to achieve self-consciousness.
- Because self-consciousness exists in recognizing and being recognized, the self—the individual human personality—is initially unsure of its own existence. _Selfhood_, the quality of possessing self-consciousness, is essentially a status bestowed by existing with other humans; it is not an intrinsic quality of the human mind. As a result of this uncertainty, self-consciousness is also self-obsessed. It is willing to sacrifice everything external to establish and preserve selfhood.
- Hegel argues that the self is initially willing to destroy the other (the other person) to establish itself. He calls this a "life-and-death struggle." However, this struggle does not actually satisfy the desire to be recognized because it ends the struggle and destroys the self in the process. Instead, humans desire to elevate their social status and diminish the status of others. Put simply, humans desire to become "lords," or masters, of others. Someone becomes a lord by making others dependent upon them. A lord relegates other humans to the status of objects, thus proving the lord's selfhood by the diminishment of the self-consciousness of the others.
- Hegel detects a paradox in the lord-servant relationship. To establish selfhood the lord elevates themselves over other people (servants). However, it is the servant who becomes truly self-consciousness in the dynamic process between servants and masters. The lord's selfhood is nothing without the regard of the servants, so the lord depends on the servants for consciousness of the lord's self. In a way the lord is actually denying themselves of reaching true self-consciousness because the lord refuses to recognize their servants as equal, which must happen to gain self consciousness. Therefore, it is the servant that achieves true self-consciousness, as Hegel sees it. The lord functions as a universal "other" against which the subordinate servants must always compare themselves. Servants then elevate themselves out of fear of the other (other people) to achieve true self-consciousness by recognizing themselves in other people (in the selfhood of the lord, in Hegel's model). Hegel argues that through servitude, the servant effectively becomes their own master through obedience and discipline. It is these virtues that are the stuff of true self-consciousness.
- Hegel is arguing that it is exactly this discipline and self-mastery that proves crucial to the ongoing development of the human spirit, or general consciousness. The false and fragile selfhood of lords provides no such development because it puts consciousness at the whim of certain individuals.
___
# Self-Consciousness, Part 3 : Freedom of Self-Consciousness | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel states that an expression of the servant's self-consciousness is found in the philosophy of Stoicism. Stoicism is a philosophical school developed by thinkers in ancient Greece and Rome who argued that humans should live calmly and rationally and not give in to emotions such as anger or envy. Hegel says that the essential principle of Stoicism is that the individual is a thinking individual. What an individual is thinking does not matter so much as the fact that the individual is thinking as they act. The Stoic withdraws from the world to engage in thought and experiences a kind of freedom by doing so. But, Hegel says, Stoicism is incapable of discerning truth or virtue because it is always inwardly focused.
- Where Stoicism cannot grapple with truth, Hegel argues that skepticism can. Skepticism is doubt about whether things can be truly known. Skepticism, for Hegel, is the last stage of the dialectical development of consciousness he has been exploring so far. Proceeding from sense-certainty to the understanding, then to the dialectic between master and servant, Hegel claims that skepticism finally seeks to dissolve anything that can be known about the world.
- He argues, however, that in practice, skepticism is incoherent. Even though a skeptic may deny that anything can be known about the world, they live their lives as if this is not true. That is, they still have to rise in the morning, work for a living, and obey laws of motion, for instance. Skepticism is ultimately a hopeless and childish way of looking at the world. However, Hegel argues that skepticism isn't aware that it is contradictory.
- He calls the consciousness that emerges from skepticism the _Unhappy Consciousness_. It is unhappy because it is troubled, uncertain, and self-contradictory. Nevertheless, it is another step in the progress of spirit. The Unhappy Consciousness acts as a bridge between the two sides of consciousness: the _Unchangeable_ (perfect unity) and the infinite variability of things in the world. Hegel explains how the Unhappy Consciousness is alienated, or separate from, the Unchangeable. The only way the Unhappy Consciousness can experience unity with the Unchangeable is by surrendering all enjoyment of the world, and all fruits of labor, to a mediating, ministerial consciousness. Because of this alienation, the Unhappy Consciousness mediates its relationship to the unchangeable through a ministering, or priestly, consciousness. The relief from the contradictions of consciousness presented by surrendering to the ministerial (acting in a prescribed or rigid manner based on principles or laws; without flexibility, personal discretion, or judgment) mediator, however, is only temporary. It leads to the next phase of development: reason.
- Hegel's terms and ideas in this section borrow from Christian and philosophical concepts. When he speaks of alienation from the Unchangeable, he is echoing the Christian idea that humankind is sinful and thus unable to be one with God. But Hegel uses varied language because he does not wish to refer only to Christianity. He is making an argument about the ascent of human consciousness, and his terms are meant to be applied to many different examples. The Unchangeable and the mediating ministerial consciousness do act as stand-ins for the Christian God and Christian priests (or Christian principles), but Hegel does not think these are the only cases to which his account applies. Christian theology has provided some of the structure for his thinking, but Hegel is making his own unique argument.
___
# Reason, Part 1 : The Certainty and Truth of Reason | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- From consciousness and the mediated Unhappy Consciousness described previously emerge _reason_, the next stage of spirit's development. Hegel defines _reason_ as the certainty of consciousness that it is the whole of reality. That is, reason is the belief that consciousness contains the world; it is not just an observer of it. Hegel begins his exploration of reason by discussing idealism. By _idealism_, he is referring to the idealism promoted by the philosopher Immanuel Kant and his followers. Kantian idealism, or _transcendental idealism_, argues that humans build knowledge from the evidence of their senses and from the imposition (establishing, organizing, or arranging) of universal categories on that sensory evidence. Hegel is not satisfied with this sort of idealism, however. He thinks it is far too simplistic an account of how knowledge is built. He insists that knowledge arises out of a messy process, which he compares to consciousness wandering about the world trying to make sense of it all. Hegel argues that Kantian idealism is too abstract. It asserts that knowledge is formed in a particular way but neglects to show the process. Hegel will attempt to rectify this error.
- Hegel notes that reason, because it believes consciousness to be the world, acts differently than the earlier stage of sense-certainty. Sense-certainty experiences the world through sensory data. Reason, however, actively chooses what it is experiencing. Thus, reason is a mode of thought in which a reasoning person determines what the world is.
- Hegel proceeds to describe how reason has emerged. He argues that it arises initially out of the need of the human mind to discern between the important aspects of objects (things in the world) and their coincidental aspects. Hegel calls this _observing reason_ because of its origin in the observation of nature. Important aspects are essential qualities, those qualities that make a thing a thing and allow it to be distinguished from other things. Incidental qualities do not provide this layer of distinction when considered. Reason performs this task of discernment. However, as a mode of thought, reason also wishes to discover (or establish) laws that govern the distinctions between one object and another. These are, effectively, what people think of as the laws of physics, of motion, and so on. Hegel says that these laws people have observed are, implicitly, notions. A notion is a pure and true idea. Hegel argues that reason wants to take this implicit relationship between the law and notion and make it explicit. That is, humans are prompted by a reasoning consciousness to try and distill laws until they are a pure expression of a fundamental notion. Reasoning humans achieve this through scientific and other experiments.
- Hegel argues that these laws, however, never rise to the level of providing truly rich descriptions of the world. He demonstrates this assertion by discussing the human organism. He divides his discussion into two parts: internal and external. Hegel states that the human organism has three functions: (1) sensibility is the mind's attempt to relate everything to itself, (2) irritability is the body's response to outside phenomena, and (3) reproduction is the body's drive to replicate itself. Hegel argues that sensibility is vague and little understood and that this understanding has not been improved by the revelations of anatomy (the study of the physical body) in showing how the nervous system in the body is structured. Hegel thus shows that determining the laws of physical human existence is no more worthwhile than a list of facts about bodies. Studying the physical body tells little about humanity, the experience of being human. He therefore dismisses observational reason because it fails to provide more information than people's senses already tell them.
- Hegel considers the human organism in its external relations—the description of how humans relate to the world and to one another. Once more, he charges reason with reducing complexity to an abstraction. He says that such an abstraction makes humans appear as if they are inorganic, or not alive at all, which he thinks is absurd.
- Ultimately, Hegel asserts that "observing reason" never produces anything that has the truth or explanatory power of a law.
- Hegel turns to consider the laws of thought. The laws of thought are the result of the mind's observation turning inward and observing itself. The laws of thought govern how humans think. The early expression of this inward observation is psychology, the study of the mind. Hegel does not think much of the capabilities of psychology in his time. To Hegel, like observing reason, psychology primarily deals with individual particulars, and not with spirit, the overarching social consciousness with which Hegel is primarily concerned. Psychology, like all reason, simply makes lists of phenomena and is not able to properly explain them or relate them to a greater explanation of human thought.
- Hegel discusses reason's attempts to pin down spirit (collective human consciousness) and describe it as if it were an inert object. For Hegel, the spirit is a living thing, and so treating it like an object will never be successful.
# Reason, Part 2 : Actualization of Self-Consciousness | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Having described the limits of observational reason, Hegel proceeds to describe _rational self-consciousness_, the marriage of reason and self-consciousness. Observational reason, as Hegel describes it, consists of making lists of things and constructing laws from these lists. But Hegel believes that reason must develop from this point to encapsulate a social dimension. Because he is interested in spirit, the collective mind, Hegel reiterates his belief that self-consciousness is only achieved in a social relationship. That is, self-consciousness exists when a human recognizes another human as being self-conscious. Rational self-consciousness is, likewise, a social relationship. Rational self-consciousness exists and is expressed in a society's laws, traditions, and ethics.
- Self-conscious members of a society live for that society. They direct their efforts toward the furtherance of common goals. Self-conscious individuals, however, also break the social bonds in an organized society. Their individuality causes them to reject the community's laws in order to seek individual fulfillment. In individualistic times, such as those in which Hegel believes he lives, self-consciousness must be realized in individual human minds.
- Hegel discerns three ways in which individuals try to fulfill their rational self-consciousness. The first is by the "pursuit of pleasure." The pursuit of pleasure consists of the individual rejecting any higher moral calling or duty in their society. Instead, the individual lives in the moment, trying to make themselves feel good through pleasurable experiences. Hegel argues that this sort of pleasure-seeking can never truly be realized. The individual is always seeking pleasure and can never truly find it. Hegel thus remarks that self-realization of this kind actually becomes not individualism, but universalism, in which individuality ceases to exist. The individual surrenders to the principle of the pursuit of pleasure.
- The second form Hegel calls the "law of the heart," or the law of self-conceit (self-obsession or self-centeredness). Hegel says that the law of the heart primarily opposes the world. That is, the individual rejects the laws and structures of society and instead decides that what they want to do is what is best for everyone. Hegel considers these people living contradictions and points out that, like the pleasure-seeker, their desire can never truly be satisfied. Someone following the law of the heart is a natural rebel, no matter what it is they are rebelling against.
- The third and final form of self-realization is the "discipline of virtue." Hegel introduces virtue by first describing what he calls the _way of the world_. To follow the way of the world is to compromise individuality to some extent by agreeing with other individuals to follow collectively agreed-upon social rules. Hegel stresses that this collective virtue is composed of the actions of individuals and cannot exist without them. His idea of the way of the world is heavily influenced by the free-market (or _laissez-faire_) economic attitudes that were becoming fashionable in his time. Free-market economics stressed that the best way for an economy to run is to leave its functions to the work of self-interested individuals, not for governments to tinker with it from above. Likewise, the way of the world works through self-conscious individuals surrendering themselves to it.
- Virtue, however, seeks to impose a direction on the way of the world. People driven by virtue try to make the world into a disinterested (that is, not favoring anyone or anything) social order by exerting themselves as individuals. Hegel argues that this drive is misguided because the way of the world is already disinterested. He points out that simply accepting the way of the world as it is means a person can never be disappointed with it, whereas the efforts of virtue are always imperiled. Hegel ultimately thinks that a person motivated by virtue is vain.
___
# Reason, Part 3 : Individuality Real In and For Itself | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel argues that, through individuality and self-interest, consciousness has finally risen to a level of certainty in itself. That is, consciousness, through individuality, is no longer worried about whether it is distinct from reality or not. Instead, individuality causes humans to desire to act and demonstrate their individuality in the world.
- Hegel distinguishes between human thought and human action. He says that thoughts are merely intentions and that it is only in action that individuality is made manifest in the world. He also turns this idea on its head, saying that humans often only become aware of what they intended to do after they have acted. Their actions are both determined by, and determine, their aims, which are sometimes hidden. Likewise, Hegel says that an individual's actions reveal their inner nature, or their personality, which is otherwise unknowable to others.
- Hegel calls the thing upon which a human works when they act the _matter in hand_. When working on a matter in hand, an individual faces the possibility of success or failure. People know that how they act on the matter in hand will reveal their aims and their nature. Working on the matter in hand is thus a type of performance. Whenever people act, they are performing. Thus, work becomes a matter of fulfilling their desires and their egos because when they are working, they are trying to show themselves as they wish to be seen. Hegel says that this elevates work to the level of a moral imperative for humans in general. While an individual wishes to work and be seen to work (and to do good work), this principle then also applies to humans in general, not just the specific individual, because the act of working and being seen is general in society.
- Hegel returns to the idea he has been developing, that reason functions within collective consciousness. He argues that the use of reason in society is to test the laws of society. Hegel views the laws of society as the expressions of moral precepts, or firm moral principles, that exist within a society. He believes that laws discerned by reason are only ever expressions of principles that already exist. Communities already live ethically not because they have laws, but because they are communities. Hegel says that the reverse is actually true: communities have laws because ethics already exist in society.
___
# Spirit, Part 1 : The Ethical Order | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel turns to the subject of spirit itself. Spirit is what reason becomes when reason's certainty that it is all reality is elevated to the level of truth, that is, when reason becomes fully conscious that it is all that exists in reality. This consciousness developed, as Hegel described in the previous section, as reason applied itself to work (the task at hand) or through individualistic morality. Spirit is the collective consciousness, and the collective morality, of society. It is something that all humans relate to and experience, and it is what allows humans to live as something more than isolated individuals. Hegel considers the truth of spirit to be found in the living ethical world, that is, the vibrant, real-life experience of living ethically in society.
- True spirit is found in the ethical order, that is, the system of laws and norms within society. Hegel calls these things the _ethical substance_ because they are the implementation of ethical ideas and principles in the world. The ethical order reveals the dual nature of spirit, which is what exists in and through individual human actions and also exists as an external ideal. Spirit is thus both human and above humanity, and Hegel calls these respectively the _human law_ and the _Divine Law_. Spirit can be viewed as a thing that is thus both human and divine (above humanity) because spirit has a dual nature: humans can live ethically, that is, they can make moral judgments and seek to improve themselves, rather than just blindly follow laws. Spirit is thus associated with justice.
- Divine law is like human law in that it has its own self-consciousness. The model of this self-consciousness is the family. Hegel considers the family the most natural ethical community of humans because of the way they relate to the dead, specifically dead ancestors, who become in death a universal ideal necessary for ethical self-consciousness. Divine law is in a sense a relationship with the dead.
- Human law, meanwhile, proceeds from government, which is the expression of the community's legal and ethical order. Human law is always based on the background of divine law. Hegel argues that human law and divine law are dependent on one another. Even though human law needs divine law, divine law only exists in the world through human action and human implementation. The ethical system that arises is a stable and peaceful one that satisfies the individualistic desires of humans and attends to the moral and practical needs of the community.
- Hegel proceeds to consider how ethical principles are put into practice through human actions. Human actions cannot implement both divine law and human law at the same time, as putting them into action brings the two into conflict and favors one or the other. But as someone favors one or the other in their actions, they cannot completely forsake their relationship with the other. Hegel suggests that this conflict within and between people destroys the ethical customs of society. He associates the struggle between the laws to the battle between men and women in society (the agents of the struggle between the laws). What results from the struggle is a society based on endless individualism.
- The individualistic society is based on the principle that individuals are the basic unit of society (rather than families). Individuals are afforded rights because they are individuals, not because they possess any other quality or characteristic. In this individualistic society, people seek to establish their personal qualities by becoming property owners and so on. The ultimate expression of this greedy (property- and wealth-focused) individualism is the elevation of single individuals as an emperor, the master of the world, who is chosen to live a life of excess, akin to a living god. Hegel's terms in this section suggest he is thinking specifically of ancient Roman society.
___
# Spirit, Part 2 : Culture | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel claims that the ethical spirit becomes divided between two worlds: the world of culture and the world of faith. One is the implementation of law and ideas and the other is the externalized work of belief, faith, and ethics, related to divine law. This division leads Hegel to consider the Enlightenment, the intellectual movement favoring science and reason over religion that was well established in Europe by the end of the 18th century. Hegel argues that when viewed through the lens of the Enlightenment, the distinct halves of ethical spirit become one whole with two poles. At one end is the unknowable and impossibly distant avatar, or concept, of divine law, and at the other pole is pure human utilitarianism, an ethical philosophy that, broadly speaking, seeks the maximization of positive outcomes for the greatest quantity of people.
- Hegel considers Enlightenment directly. He says that in an enlightened society, society itself splits into three elements. These are (1) the spirit of uniformity, (2) the spirit of individual difference, and (3) the spirit that unites both aspects as self-consciousness. People in society come to believe that the first element is what is good about their society and the second, individualism, is what is bad. The first Hegel associates with government, or state power. The second he associates with greed and the desire for profit. He argues that in pitting one against the other (judging the state good and profit bad), the roles can be reversed. Ultimately, the way a person judges the government or profit determines their view of such things.
- Hegel outlines the tendency of human culture to create oppositions between positive and negative things, which permeate all aspects of culture. Even public service contains within itself the possibility that a servant's intentions are bad, or that their actions will produce negative outcomes, while greed likewise can have positive outcomes or be motivated by good intentions.
- Hegel turns from culture to what seems to be its opposite, the realm of faith and pure insight. He suggests that religious faith is consciousness attempting to retreat from the world, and specifically from culture. However, it cannot succeed in doing so entirely because it is always defined by what it is fleeing. That is, the retreating, religious consciousness defines itself by the negative things in culture it is trying not to be. Pure insight, on the other hand, is the opposition to religious faith, but like religious faith, it tries to reject culture. Pure insight is not directed at a God or gods, however, but the ideal of truth, or what Hegel calls the _absolute notion_.
- Hegel returns to the concept of _enlightenment_, the mode of thinking that unites all the negative attitudes of consciousness. Enlightenment calls religious faith superstition and seeks to eradicate it. Hegel notes that enlightenment believes it can end religion in a single stroke by changing people's minds without a struggle. Despite this belief, those who are followers of enlightenment and those who are religious find themselves locked in a battle to prove or defend their ideas. Hegel states that enlightenment does a service to religious faith by showing it what it really is, but enlightenment avoids considering itself in this way. That is, enlightenment, in opposing religious faith, does not see that it is a kind of faith in itself. It is just that enlightenment considers the absolute notion, rather than God, its ideal.
- Enlightenment triumphs over faith eventually, but it is an empty victory in Hegel's view. This is because enlightenment cannot be satisfied just by demonstrating the falsity of religious faith. Enlightenment responds to this hollow victory by promoting a doctrine of utilitarianism. It is in utilitarianism, or "utility," that reason and human desires are united.
- Utility results from the human mind realizing that its existence is human consciousness recognizing itself. Thus humans come to believe that all that matters in existence is the human mind acting in the world, or the human will. In practical terms, Hegel states that human thinking, through an interest in utilitarianism, becomes concerned with what he calls _absolute freedom_ or _absolute subjectivity_. Absolute freedom or subjectivity means that human individuals believe that their individual existence and their individual will (preference) is sovereign, or all-important. Absolute freedom has a political expression in movements, such as the French Revolution, to secure the rights of individuals. Thus the individual will, in certain moments, become the general will, as the desire of individuals to secure absolute freedom becomes generalized in a social movement (that is, when a large group of people comes to share the belief in absolute individual freedom). When the general will of the people is made the law of the land, again, as in the French Revolution, it produces the effect of trying to eliminate all distinctions (like class, wealth, ethnicity) between individuals in a society.
- There is a problem in the ascent of the general will and in utility, however. As much as humans may try to implement a general will, society is made up of individuals. Hegel says that the only truly communal work is the work of destruction. Moreover, self-consciousness relies on recognizing and denying itself in others, and so distinctions of class, race, and sex cannot be truly abolished. This can be seen in the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution of the late-18th century, in which royals, aristocrats, and their sympathizers were beaten, imprisoned, and executed as an expression of the revolution's remaking of society.
___
# Spirit, Part 3 : Morality | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- While terror is the negative consequence of absolute freedom, the positive consequence is universal and individual morality. Hegel believes that the French Revolution failed to realize the goal of establishing the social primacy of absolute freedom (the sovereignty of individuals). But the revolution, by annihilating the old order of kings and priests in France, established a union between the individual and society, which is the root of individual and universal morality. This individual and universal morality is a practical implementation of something like the _categorical imperative_ proposed by Kant, whose theories Hegel is expanding upon. A categorical imperative is a rule that is always true and applies to everyone equally. Kant's specific formulation of the categorical imperative was that humans should act in a manner that they would wish to see implemented as a universal law. Kant's categorical imperative was theoretical. Hegel argues that post-terror France brought it into existence in the world. Hegel claims that individuals at this stage of development have finally achieved union with their own spiritual universality (that is, their connection to all other humans). This union is expressed through the way that humans understand their role in the world and perform their appointed tasks, but also that they do not do so unthinkingly. Humans at this stage of development have both the ability to do their duty and to understand why it must be done.
- Hegel states that the moral human is opposed to nature, which is essentially immoral. Morality, as Hegel has suggested, is strongly associated with duty, especially duty to the community and to others. Humans invent for themselves an external, perfect ideal of duty (a lawgiver) to which they compare their own efforts. Moral humans thus conceive of themselves as imperfect because they hold themselves up to an impossible ideal. Because the essence of morality is projected outward (that is, perfect morality is an ideal, an external and nonexistent example), humans come to believe that there is no morality in the world as it exists. Hegel thus views morality as incomplete.
- Hegel describes how humans try to reconcile the incompleteness of morality by referring to God, or a divine being, as the ultimate arbiter of morality. Through several stages Hegel describes how this is ultimately a lost cause. He argues that morality is essentially the struggle for morality. A divine being cannot be the source of morality because it would not struggle to be moral. Without struggle, there is no morality at all. So Hegel views God as impersonating all the contradictions of morality itself and therefore cannot be more than an object of human thought.
- Hegel turns, then, to consider conscience. Conscience consists of the human mind taking into itself the transcendent moral arbiter (God or the divine being). Conscience is the internalization of the ultimate moral authority, or a mode of thinking and acting as if such an authority exists, whether or not it does.
- Hegel views conscience as the means by which morality's contradictions and struggles are reconciled. Conscience is content to root its principles in human actions and not to reject culture or retreat into religious faith. It is rooted in reality and duty and is developed and reinforced by communal action and communal approval.
- When multiple duties or calls to action coincide, conscience does not appeal outside itself to decide what must be done. It spurs humans to make their own decisions. Hegel says that conscience is essentially arbitrary, that is, it has no ultimate or external reference. It exists, as Hegel is keen to stress, as spirit, or within the collective mind of humanity. Hegel calls conscience _spirit sure of itself_. That is, it is spirit that has struggled to reach this stage of realization and confidence. It is no longer troubled by the earlier struggles and contradictions.
- Hegel identifies language as the _medium of spirit_. Spirit exists and is expressed through words. Language is the means by which a self recognizes another self and bridges the divide between the two (or more) minds.
___
#  Religion, Part 1 : Natural Religion | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel notes that his description of the progress of spirit has touched on the "absolute," or the divine being, several times but never truly or fully. He suggests that the absolute only reveals itself in this latest stage of development. Hegel sketches the previous appearances of the absolute. He says that the Unhappy Consciousness tried to reach the absolute, while reason failed to see that the absolute was right in front of it. Hegel says that it is in religion that spirit achieves self-consciousness.
- Religion, Hegel claims, emerges out of the several stages of thought he has described. Its emergence and its history echo those stages, which he then proceeds to describe.
- The first of these stages Hegel calls _natural religion_. He begins a historical sketch of dualistic religions that propose a good god of light and truth, and an evil god of darkness and lies. Hegel claims that spirit is initially aware of itself as a light of knowledge compared to the darkness of ignorance. This description deliberately echoes the dualism of the Persian religion Zoroastrianism, which personifies this opposition in the evil force that opposes its main god, who embodies goodness. Hegel says that this stage sees religion at the level of sense-certainty.
- Religion develops to the stage in which spirit perceives itself in nature spirits. Plants and animals are perceived as being the stuff of religion and spirituality.
- Spirit then ascends to the level, associated with Egyptian religions, of seeing that it acts upon the world. In this stage, as with the example Hegel described earlier, religion seeks to objectify (literally, to make objects of) itself in the form of buildings like pyramids and columns, and religious artifacts. Hegel remarks that at this level, religion acts as an artificer or craftsman. As it develops, it moves into the realm of art.
___
# Religion, Part 2 : Religion in the Form of Art | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Religion takes the form of art in a society that has reached the ethical stage of development. Art is distinguished from earlier forms of religion. Religion in the form of art is an expression of ethics detached from mere nature. Religion as art is the expression of the ethics, laws, and norms of free and independent people. Hegel is thinking specifically of the religions of ancient Greece, which were public-spirited and artistically explored.
- Hegel sketches the history of religion as art. He believes that in the first stage of development, this art was abstract and individualistic. In particular, he is thinking about statues of gods. A statue of a god represents an idealized human (a human with the properties and proportions of a divine being). Hegel, again thinking of the Greek gods in particular, identifies such an image of the divine with a mixture of the human and the spiritual. He notes that such an image or religion may contain elements of the ancient, more raw and natural past. In Hegel's Greek example, the gods are descended from, and contain aspects of, the mythical Titans whom the gods defeated in an allegory for the triumph of civilization over nature.
- Hegel remarks that the act of turning the gods into statues brings them down from the heavens, or from the realm of unknowable ideals, and makes them human, material, and relatable. Cult religions consist of a specific set of ritual practices. A ritual, by definition, is an action. Religion of this type effectively produces and reproduces (through ritual) the objects of worship.
- Hegel moves on to consider spiritual works of art. He remarks on how individual gods, in this stage, are assembled into a pantheon, a collection or family of gods. In this discussion Hegel is referring specifically to Greek epics, stories that wove together tales of the gods, humans, their mutual jealousies, and the troubles of life. Hegel points out that this artistic conception of the gods humanizes them (whereas the statues made them into objects). Hegel discusses Greek tragedy and comedy at length. He concludes that comedy reveals that all the moral arbiters and divine powers humans construct over themselves are just products of human self-consciousness.
___
# Religion, Part 3 : The Revealed Religion | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel then considers what he calls _revealed religion_. He notes that the artistic religion that produces tragedies and comedies is a product of a society in which the ethical order is losing ground to rampant individualism. Revealed religion, however, witnesses a rebirth of spirit. The main example of revealed religion that Hegel focuses on is Christianity, in which God became human. In such a circumstance, Hegel says, humans come to believe not that God is a trick of the mind but that he is actually incarnate before them, as real to people as any other human being might be. Hegel claims that this incarnation of God is, for God, the fulfillment of what it means to be "God." God cannot be remote from humanity or nonexistent in the world. God must be part of the world.
- For Hegel it is even more profound for God to be part of the physical world but only for a limited time, as in the life of Jesus Christ. To become something that can be shared by all humans, Christ had to both live and die, and his death had to recede into the past. Not all humans can share in the experience of Christ's life, Hegel suggests, but all can share in the example and the reality of his past existence. Christ moved from the specific to the universal.
- Hegel describes the development of religion through pictures or picture-thoughts of stages in its history. For instance, he describes the idea of the fall from grace when Adam and Eve became ashamed of themselves and experienced distance from God, as a picture-thought of the first experience of self-consciousness.
- Hegel discusses God in this form of religion. He says that humans tend to insist that evil must come from something other than God, such as the devil that is opposed to God. But Hegel conceives of God as the "absolute being" from which nothing can be separate. The root of evil lies in the absolute and it is closely related to the root of good.
- Hegel reiterates his belief that spirit, ultimately, is achieved in the human conscience. In the conscience humans take God into themselves. Hegel suggests that evil thus stems from the same impulse as good, and knowledge of evil is, in fact, essential to good, and vice versa. That is, to rebel against laws and norms, which is what is usually defined as evil, a person must first know what those laws and norms are. Evil, Hegel restates, is nothing more than a result of self-consciousness.
___
# Absolute Knowing | Summary

## Key Takeaways

- Hegel asserts that revealed religion, like Christianity, makes pictures or picture-thoughts instead of achieving true self-consciousness. The story of Christianity and other revealed religions is the model of self-consciousness, but it is not self-consciousness.
- Hegel recapitulates the argument that he has been making by sketching once more the ascent of human spirit in terms of the development of the self from sense-certainty to religion.
- He argues that spirit must progress beyond religion, which is the making of picture-thoughts of the absolute. He argues that in the new stage of development, the contents of religion must become the contents and guide of people's actions. Hegel claims that the stage that is now being achieved is what he calls the _systematic science_, which is a pure knowledge of the self. This systematic science has been achieved through the long and tortuous processes he has described. There can be no other way, because for Hegel, knowledge is formed through struggle and development.
- Hegel restates his principle as a conclusion. Systematic science has to observe the development of spirit in specific times, places, and environments. It cannot be purely theoretical or speculative. As a result, the science of spirit is in a sense the work of history.
___
# Quotes

1.

> The goal where it can lay aside the title 'love of knowing' and be actual knowing. 

Narrator, [Preface](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/preface-summary/)

Hegel is referring to philosophy, which literally means "love of knowing." He intends his text to help move philosophy on to the level of what he considers a science. In Hegel's view a science is a systematic and rigorous system. He contrasts what has previously existed as philosophy with what he intends to make of it. He believes past philosophers have not actually grasped fundamental or absolute truth. His concept of actual knowing is what he will also call _absolute knowing_, that is, human knowledge that encompasses all aspects of the world.

2.

> The single individual is incomplete Spirit. 

Narrator, [Preface](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/preface-summary/)

Hegel believes spirit to be the collective human consciousness. It exists as a result of the activity and thoughts of individuals but is over and above groups of individuals, as culture, morality, ethics, and so on. This idea of human thought and knowledge as a collective and overarching thing leads Hegel to conclude that an individual is an incomplete aspect of the whole. Spirit exists in the individual, and the individual helps produce it, but an individual is just one part of the larger whole. Throughout the text Hegel continues to stress the collective nature of spirit because it contrasts with individualistic ideas of how knowledge is formed. He argues against those precise ideas.

3.

> Let the other sciences try to argue as much as they like without philosophy ... they can have ... neither life, spirit, nor truth. 

Narrator, [Preface](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/preface-summary/)

Hegel contrasts his systematic science of philosophy with what he believes is produced by mere natural sciences. He believes that the natural sciences only produce lists of facts with little explanatory power. The work of philosophy, Hegel insists, is precisely the work of explaining the world and existence by grasping the ultimate truth of the absolute. Hegel dismisses science without philosophy as inert and dead (it doesn't have life), lacking spirit (because it has no relation to the ethical, moral, and cultural collective consciousness of humanity), and false (because it only lists items and does not explain the whole). Hegel is arguing principally against the kind of natural sciences that were being produced during the Enlightenment. He saw these as failed attempts to grasp fundamental truth, and so he dismisses them.

4.

> The bondsman realizes that it is precisely in his work ... that he acquires a mind of his own. 

Narrator, [Self-Consciousness, Part 2](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/self-consciousness-part-2-summary/)

Hegel's historical sketch of the relationship between masters and servants is a general one. _Bondsman_ is a stand-in for a number of historical relations of servitude, from slavery, serfdom, and even knighthood. What matters is that the bondsman is a subordinate of a lord and master. Hegel subverts the expectation of what a master-servant relationship entails. He points out that while the "lord" put themselves above the servants to demonstrate their selfhood, it is actually the servants who gain true self-consciousness. The mechanism Hegel describes here is that, by being made to work for their living and status, it is the servant who discovers self-mastery and discipline, which are the essential internal qualities of self-consciousness. Thus, while the lord places themselves at the top of the social hierarchy, it is the subordinates who profit in terms of the evolution of spirit. And it is this evolution that matters most because it is a necessary step on the road to humanity's true grasping of the absolute. Historical servitude was thus, in the long run, a good thing.

5.

> The individuality of the "way of the world" ... is better than it thinks. 

Narrator, [Reason, Part 2](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/reason-part-2-summary/)

Hegel argues that the way of the world—a natural state of being in which humans submit to the way things are—creates virtuous outcomes. What he means is that if people just accepted the way the world was in the time they were living in, they would have seen that it was as fair and just as it could be at that point in time. This is because ethics and justice ultimately move along with the evolution of human spirit. People cannot force this change by crusading for virtue. To embark on such a crusade actually undermines the cause because to do so means to separate from the community and from spirit. The struggle for virtue is thus a trap. Hegel believes that individuality in "the way of the world" is better than it seems because it appears to be self-interested greed, but in actuality it produces positive outcomes. This idea of Hegel's is related to the notions of free-market economics, which were being popularized in the mid-to-late 18th century.

6.

> Reason is spirit when its certainty of being all reality has been raised to truth. 

Narrator, [Spirit, Part 1](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/spirit-part-1-summary/)

Hegel believes reason is a way of thinking that believes that it is the world, not that it perceives truth in the world. What Hegel is trying to resolve here is how reason, as a mode of thinking, becomes spirit, which in Hegel's view is a higher and more valuable form of thinking. He argues that reason becomes spirit when reason's argument about the world is elevated to the level of truth. That is, when the reasoning mind sees that it really is the whole world (that there is not a world beyond it, only the world that exists in the reasoning mind), it becomes Spirit. This is because the reasoning mind becomes self-conscious of its nature and confident as a result of it.

7.

> Self-consciousness knows duty to be the absolute essence. 

Narrator, [Spirit, Part 3](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/spirit-part-3-summary/)

Hegel identifies duty as the heart of morality. Duty is service to the community and the moral sense that this service is necessary and good. Thus, duty, which is outwardly focused and communitarian, is the essence of earthly morality. Self-consciousness is the self-aware and self-reflective mind. The development of self-consciousness occurred in an earlier discussion, when Hegel examined the dynamic between masters and servants. There, he remarked that self-consciousness arose in the servant's need to work. Here, Hegel expands on the idea by adding that work, or the active practical expression of self-consciousness, is a reflection of its absolute essence, which is the ideal of duty, rooted in communal life.

8.

> Conscience ... puts whatever content it pleases into its knowing and willing. 

Narrator, [Spirit, Part 3](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/spirit-part-3-summary/)

Hegel identifies conscience as the highest form of morality. Conscience is the mode of thinking in which the God of "Divine Law" is internalized by humans. That is, conscience spurs humans to act as if there were a God or a universal arbiter even if there is not. What Hegel is describing here, however, is his contention that conscience is essentially amoral. That is, there is no intrinsic right or wrong. Hegel wants to stress that the source of ethical or moral beliefs is really in spirit, or society. The individual conscience is a reflection of this spirit within a society. There is no external source of morality, or a universal arbiter, that exists beyond society. Instead, conscience is the internalization of spirit itself, which is all that exists to guide and inform human action.

9.

> Spirit is thus ... in universal self-consciousness; it is its community. 

Narrator, [Religion, Part 3](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/religion-part-3-summary/)

Hegel makes clear what he means by spirit, which has already been glimpsed and touched on many times earlier in his argument. Spirit is the collective consciousness of communities. It is the result of self-consciousness and the recognizing of self-consciousness in others. Hegel asserts that spirit is a product of and an overarching aspect of human societies that exists both as a part and as an overarching layer of society. It is reflected in individuals, but it only exists as a result of communities. For this reason, Hegel considers spirit to exist in various forms, such as the spirit of the times, or the spirit of a nation or a people.

10.

> The goal, absolute knowing, or spirit that knows itself as spirit. 

Narrator, [Absolute Knowing](https://www.coursehero.com/lit/Phenomenology-of-Spirit/absolute-knowing-summary/)

Hegel establishes that the absolute knowing, or the mind that encompasses the absolute, is the end goal of the ascent of human spirit. His narrative is a progression with definite stages. Each stage is necessary and each is a part of the progress toward the definite goal of absolute knowing. For this reason, Hegel's argument is called _teleological_—it implies a definite outcome that events are moving toward. Absolute knowing is spirit that knows itself as spirit. That is, it is spirit that has self-consciousness, just as spirit is the product of individual self-consciousness. Self-consciousness or self-awareness is thus reinforced as the status that elevates a mode of thinking from one to another. A spirit that is self-conscious is truly aware of itself and its existence, and is thus confident enough to finally grasp the ultimate, all-encompassing truth of the absolute.
___
# Glossary

**absolute:** all-encompassing, ultimate truth or ultimate reality, heavily associated with the concept of God or the divine

**dialectic:** the manner in which concepts progress through internal contradictions and external conflicts with opposing concepts

**force:** an idea that is assumed to be true in order to try to explain existence

**notion:** a pure idea or concept

**perception:** the active application of the senses to the world, contrasted with passive sensation

**reason:** the active application of thoughts and concepts that aims to understand the nature of reality

**science:** a systematic form of philosophical knowledge, not the natural sciences like physics

**self-consciousness:** consciousness that is aware of itself

**sense-certainty:** the earliest level of consciousness, a pure passive intake of sensory data about the world

**skepticism:** philosophical doctrine that doubts or denies existence

**spirit:** the collective human consciousness that exists above individuals in culture, law, ethics, and ideas

**Stoicism:** philosophical doctrine that promotes reason as the highest virtue and promotes the tolerance of pain and misfortune

**understanding:** the translation of concepts into knowledge

**universal:** the general or nonspecific
___
# Biography

### Birth and Education

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel was born August 27, 1770, in Stuttgart, Germany. From 1788 to 1793 he studied theology and philosophy at a seminary (a school of Christian theology) in Tübingen. Hegel's parents had hoped he would become a priest, but he was dissatisfied with his teachers and gravitated toward working as a philosopher and teacher. After graduating, Hegel worked in Berne, Switzerland, as a private tutor. In 1801 he took up a post as a university lecturer in Jena, Germany.

### Major Early Works

While in Jena, Hegel began to publish his philosophical works. His first major publication was _Phenomenology of Spirit_ in 1807. This text attempted to describe the historical development of "Spirit" (the collective human mind) from simple consciousness of the world toward absolute knowledge, total knowledge of all that exists, achieved through the collective spirit becoming self-conscious. Hegel was writing at a time when Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821) of France and his armies were entering Jena in 1806. Napoleon's invasion disrupted Hegel's teaching activities, and he left Jena for Bamberg in 1807, and then moved to Nuremberg in 1808. While living in Nuremberg, Hegel published the two volumes of his _Science of Logic_ (1812–16).

### Later Career and Death

In 1816 Hegel was appointed chair of philosophy at the University of Heidelberg but did not remain there long. In 1818 he took up the chair of philosophy at the University of Berlin, at the time the most prestigious position in German philosophy. In 1821 Hegel published _Elements of the Philosophy of_ _Right_, his major work of political philosophy. Throughout his life Hegel was deeply interested in the political sphere, and he wrote widely on the subject. He became a celebrity in Berlin. His work was the capstone of a philosophical school called "German idealism," which attempted to unite all philosophical studies in a general system of philosophy. Idealism was the philosophical school that distinguished between human perception of the world and objective reality. German idealists such as Immanuel Kant argued that all humans can experience is their perception of the world, not the world itself as it really is. Hegel, who was a student of Kant's, developed these ideas even further. Hegel died on November 14th, 1831, in Berlin. His contributions to philosophy made him the preeminent German philosopher of his generation.
