---
title: "Why is pork haram - islamqa"
tags:
- internetContent
- culture
type: article
fc-calendar: Gregorian Calendar
fc-date: 
year: 2023
month: July
day: 23
creation date: 2023-07-23 20:13
modification date: Sunday 23rd July 2023 20:13:32
---

#internetContent  #culture 
## Article link:
[Why is pork forbidden in Islam? - IslamQA](https://islamqa.org/?p=10110)
_____
Why is pig meat haram?
Al-jawab billahi at-taufeeq (the answer with Allah’s guidance)<br><br>The fact that consumption of pork is prohibited in Islam is well known. The following points explain various aspects of this prohibition:<br><br>1. Pork prohibited in Qur’an<br><br>The Qur’an prohibits the consumption of pork in no less than 4 different places. It is prohibited in 2:173, 5:3, 6:145 and 16:115.<br><br>“Forbidden to you (for food) are: dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which hath been invoked the name of other than Allah.” [Al-Qur’an 5:3]<br><br>The above verses of the Holy Qur’an are sufficient to satisfy a Muslim as to why pork is forbidden.<br><br>2. Pork prohibited in the Bible<br><br>The Christian is likely to be convinced by his religious scriptures. The Bible prohibits the consumption of pork, in the book of Leviticus<br><br>“And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be cloven footed, yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you”.<br><br>“Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcass shall ye not touch, they are unclean to you.”  <br>[Leviticus 11:7-8]<br><br>Pork is also prohibited in the Bible in the book of Deuteronomy<br><br>“And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the cud, it is unclean unto you. Ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor touch their dead carcass.”  <br>[Deuteronomy 14:8]<br><br>A similar prohibition is repeated in the Bible in the book of Isaiah chapter 65 verse 2-5.<br><br>3. Consumption of pork causes several diseases<br><br>The other non-Muslims and atheists will agree only if convinced through reason, logic and science. Eating of pork can cause no less than seventy different types of diseases. A person can have various helminthes like roundworm, pinworm, hookworm, etc. One of the most dangerous is Taenia Solium, which is in lay man’s terminology called tapeworm. It harbours in the intestine and is very long. Its ova i.e. eggs, enter the blood stream and can reach almost all the organs of the body. If it enters the brain it can cause memory loss. If it enters the heart it can cause heart attack, if it enters the eye it can cause blindness, if it enters the liver it can cause liver damage. It can damage almost all the organs of the body.<br><br>Another dangerous helminthes is Trichura Tichurasis. A common misconception about pork is that if it is cooked well, these ova die. In a research project undertaken in America, it was found that out of twenty-four people suffering from Trichura Tichurasis, twenty two had cooked the pork very well. This indicates that the ova present in the pork do not die under normal cooking temperature.<br><br>4. Pork has fat building material<br><br>Pork has very little muscle building material and contains excess of fat. This fat gets deposited in the vessels and can cause hypertension and heart attack. It is not surprising that over 50% of Americans suffer from hypertension.<br><br>5. Pig is one of the filthiest animals on earth<br><br>The pig is one of the filthiest animals on earth. It lives and thrives on muck, faeces and dirt. It is the best scavenger that I know that God has produced. In the villages they don’t have modern toilets and the villagers excrete in the open air. Very often excreta is cleared by pigs.<br><br>Some may argue that in advanced countries like Australia, pigs are bred in very clean and hygienic conditions. Even in these hygienic conditions the pigs are kept together in sties. No matter how hard you try to keep them clean they are filthy by nature. They eat and enjoy their own as well as their neighbour’s excreta.<br><br>6. Pig is the most shameless animal<br><br>The pig is the most shameless animal on the face of the earth. It is the only animal that invites its friends to have sex with its mate. In America, most people consume pork. Many times after dance parties, they have swapping of wives; i.e. many say “you sleep with my wife and I will sleep with your wife.” If you eat pigs then you behave like pigs.<br><br>And Only Allah Ta’ala Knows Best.<br><br>————————————–  <br>Moulana Qamruz Zaman  <br>London, UK\||
